
ANALYTICS 
Data analytics is important because it helps businesses optimize their performances. Implementing it into the business model means companies can help reduce costs by identifying more efficient ways of doing business and by storing large amounts of data.
We are starting with the metaverse and it entails a variety of opportunities for capturing and utilising data. Metaverse, being a part of web3 is a fairly new field and hence it has a lack of data points available. Most of the data of the world presently lie with web2 companies. In such a scenario metaverses must come up with tools for analytics that capture the data in the most effective form possible.
Unlike the real world where physical and tangible goods are mostly what we interact with, metaverses allow us to have digital assets and let us experience virtual environments. These assets and platforms are all composed of multiple layers of data and it is this data that we actually interact with. We all know data has multiple dimensions and these dimensions can all be cross-analysed, compared, and extracted for any business purpose.
Adapting to the data requirements of these real-time decentralised networks will also lead to more complimentary devices that enhance the experience of the metaverse. The metaverse is the future, and data has a huge part to play in determining how standardised the future will be. 
data is getting exchanged at every level based on a user’s activity, enabling us to make sense of and act/ react in these virtual environments. Did you know that just 20 minutes of VR use can produce about 2 million unique data elements? 
Data-driven businesses such as Adidas and Balenciaga have already entered the world of the metaverse. Many more are following suite, such as Disney and Epic Games. To make the most of the metaverse, decision-makers need to ensure they use a connected cloud data platform to gather and analyze insights, direct structured and unstructured data to arrange information together to gain knowledge, and aid future forecasting outcomes.  
How should companies navigate data privacy and security in the metaverse as this continues to pose a massive challenge? This requires building more data security measures like never before. Some of the other challenges that exist in metaverses are navigating the space and ensuring that seamless integration is ensured and that brands and users protect their image. By ensuring that data is at the forefront of brands’ marketing strategies, companies can ensure that their users engage with their virtual environments seamlessly and mindfully. 
With ML algorithms playing a key role, this new virtual world will also be exciting for data scientists. For example, with huge volumes of data collected at every stage, companies can drive innovative use cases and help in better shopping experiences in the meta world.
At the centre of it all — imagine the amount of data that will be generated. Did you know that by 2023, the metaverse will push internet data usage by 20 times, according to a Credit Suisse report?
 As the flow and volume of data increase, companies also need to be mindful of how to process and utilize the data generated to gain insights. 
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2022/03/how-data-will-shape-metaverse/
thus, metaverses also need standardisation of data.
There is one single problem in harvesting data from these kinds of networks, the structure of the data. Data extracted from the metaverse is generally unstructured, and new methods of data pre-processing must also be incorporated in order to truly utilise the vast amount of data properly. 
Facebook has transformed itself into Meta; however, the data it has collected over the years can still be used to power its own metaverse. There will obviously be new users but there will be many users of the old Facebook platform that will get access to the coming metaverse directly. Along with their identities, their associated marketing data will also be imported into Meta’s digital universe. This data can be used by advertisers and companies to market their products in the virtual world as well.
Sandbox already has over 500,000 users who have their own in-world assets and even games. Now, if an advertiser could effectively process all the data available from this entire population of users, then marketing campaigns can greatly be enhanced through the segregation of various demographics. Similarly, data that has been generated from external sources can also be used to advertise specific tokens or properties to users based on their interests.
Privacy and Security of Data
Other challenges we will definitely face are issues with privacy and regulations. It is essential to ensure that data is collected ethically and cannot be used for any malpractice. In the metaverse, we can also be anyone we want; however, it is still important to protect ourselves. There will be more automated systems introduced that will protect our data integrity in virtual worlds and prevent us from getting scammed.
Unlike other data centres, blockchains are digital ledger technology, creating new blocks when there are transactions of any type on the network. Compared to other networks where data can be manipulated, data cannot be manipulated in a metaverse. This is great news for both users and companies as the information, facts and figures are as accurate as possible. 
